RFB 5: Control-compatible addresses (#3385)
tahowallet/extension: rfb/rfb-5-control-compatile-addresses.md

# RFB 5: Control-compatible addresses

## Background

The Taho wallet was built with the intent of supporting not only multiple
networks, but multiple networks that might be of different types (e.g.,
non-EVM). This was a core design strategy, but it's often the case that
ongoing development can deprioritize certain thinking that maintains the
underlying flexibility needed to rerpesent these differences.

Currently, the code base assumes that a given address is always controlled by
the same underlying key, keyring, or hardware device, even if it is on a
different network. For regular keys, in practice, this is a fair assumption: if
Bob has a key that can sign for address `0x0abc` with a derivation path of
`44'/60'/0'/0/0`, the likelihood that Bob will have a different key that can
sign for address `0x0abc` but at derivation path `44'/137'/0'/0/0` is quite
low.

> This assumption falls apart when it comes to accounts that are not derived or
> controlled directly by in-memory private keys, however. For example, if Bob is
> viewing the Ethereum network and has a key for `0x0abc` at `44'/60'/0'/0/0` can
> sign a transaction for that address, they can interact with everything as
> expected--dApps, etc. If Bob switches to the Rootstock network, on the other
> hand, and they control that key using a Ledger, Ledger itself might require a
> different app to sign a transaction for that key on Roostock.

Reviewer: This section is confusing to me. 

This is what I believe it says:
- Bob has an in-memory key for `0x0abc`
- Bob also has a key for `0x0abc` on Ledger.

We say that Bob has to switch to another Ledger application to sign with that address on Rootstock and to another Ledger application to sign with that address on Ethereum. This is correct but it would be exactly the same if this account was only on Ledger. Why is the in-memory key important here?

EDIT: Okay, I think I understand - we are not talking about an in-memory key here. Let me suggest a small rewrite to make it more clear: 
```suggestion
This assumption falls apart when it comes to accounts that are not derived or
controlled directly by in-memory private keys, however. For example, if Bob is
viewing the Ethereum network and has a key for `0x0abc` at `44'/60'/0'/0/0`
controlled by Ledger, they can sign transactions and interact with everything as
expected--dApps, etc. If Bob switches to the Rootstock network, on the other
hand, Ledger itself might require a different app to sign a transaction for that
key on Rootstock.
```

and correspond to the same user on multiple networks or not.

#### Control Compatibility

To allow the above, we can introduce two concepts for any given pair of networks:

- Two networks are _transaction-compatible_ for a given hardware wallet if sign
  a transaction for both networks from the same key material without requiring
  any on-wallet manipulation[^2].
- An _address_ is considered _control-compatible_ across the pair of networks
  if it is known to be controllable by the same mechanism across those
  networks; that is, when the wallet knows for certain that the same user can
  sign for that address across both networks.

These are the cases where the wallet should assume an address is
control-compatible across 2 networks:

- The wallet controls private key material for the address (e.g. the address is
  derived from an internal keyring).
- The address was derived from a hardware wallet that controls private key
  material for the address AND the networks are transaction-compatible[^2].
- The address has been resolved via a name service lookup on both networks and
  the owner of the records is the same on both networks. [^3] This can change

>   over time, so if the wallet leverages these

Reviewer: then what? 😉

Author: Lolll let me look at that 😆

    Ethereum app (though [PR
    2577](https://github.com/tahowallet/extension/pull/2577) has introduced some
    distinctions at the Ledger level).

[^3]:
    Currently, the name service does not externalize ownership information for
    a resolved name/address, so functionality would need to be expanded to
    support this use case.

[^4]:
    This means the same address, i.e. the address corresponding to a given
    private key, is represented differently on this network than on Ethereum.

### Implementation

Anywhere that an address or name is being used to transmit funds or data, the
base data type should be an `AddressOnNetwork` or `NameOnNetwork`. This should
be the case both on the way into the UI (e.g. when displaying autocompletes or
transaction information) AND on the way out of the UI (e.g. when requesting
signature or otherwise sending information into the services). The network
information may not always be needed or used, but it should be present so that
fidelity is not lost.

The intent is to allow the UI to manage addresses as tied one-to-one to
networks, and to allow flexibility behind the scenes for addresses that might

> be known to be controlled by the same address on multiple networks.

Reviewer: From this RFB:

> (...) In particular, the goal is for an address to have enough information carried with it that the UI and internal services can inform the user **whether an address is known to exist and correspond to the same user on multiple networks or not.**

If we just pass `AddressOnNetwork` or `NameOnNetwork`, is it enough to decide about the control compatibility? Shouldn't the source be passed on as well?

Author: I think that's unclear wording on my part. Using `*OnNetwork` gives us the base information we need to later determine control compatibility. If we find out about an address but don't know which network it's for, we'll never be able to derive control compatibility information. If we have the address and network, we can check whether Taho controls private keys to it, or has been connected to a hardware wallet that does, etc.

Reviewer: Ack, that makes sense. It's my lack of understanding of the extension architecture and code. I was under the impression there is a need for an API in the extension - in a pure function mode - that receives (address, network, source)` tuples and decides about compatibility. It looks like the goal is to always pass the network along the name and/or address and the wallet can resolve the source and decide.

# RFB 5: Control-compatible addresses

## Background

The Taho wallet was built with the intent of supporting not only multiple
networks, but multiple networks that might be of different types (e.g.,
non-EVM). This was a core design strategy, but it's often the case that
ongoing development can deprioritize certain thinking that maintains the
underlying flexibility needed to rerpesent these differences.

Currently, the code base assumes that a given address is always controlled by
the same underlying key, keyring, or external device, even if it is on a
different network. For regular keys, in practice, this is a fair assumption: if
Bob has a key that can sign for address `0x0abc` with a derivation path of
`44'/60'/0'/0/0`, the likelihood that Bob will have a different key that can
sign for address `0x0abc` but at derivation path `44'/137'/0'/0/0` is quite

> low.

Author: The probability I'm noting here is that mnemonic A at a given derivation path will produce the same private key (and thus control the same address) as mnemonic B at a different derivation path. Does that answer your question? I can clarify this section if so.

> low.

Reviewer 2: aaaah ok, that makes sense 👌

> low.

Author: Awesome, I'll reword a little to clarify this.

> low.

Author: Gave it a shot @ https://github.com/tahowallet/extension/pull/3385/commits/9927e7363f4ee15af15a430b726e002a124c1108

address format; e.g., an address cannot be control-compatible between Ethereum
and Bitcoin, since the address formats are different).

This table visualizes when an Ethereum address might be control-compatible with
another network:

| Source                 | Network | Control-compatible? | Reason             |
| ---------------------- | ------- | ------------------- | ------------------ |
| New `HDKeyring`        | Polygon | Yes                 | Private key        |
| New `HDKeyring`        | RSK     | Yes                 | Private key        |
| New `HDKeyring`        | BTC     | No                  | Address format[^4] |
| Private key import     | Polygon | Yes                 | Private key        |
| Private key import     | RSK     | Yes                 | Private key        |
| Private key import     | BTC     | No                  | Address format     |
| Ledger walllet         | Polygon | Yes                 | Tx compatible      |
| Ledger walllet         | RSK     | Yes                 | Tx compatible      |
| Ledger walllet         | BTC     | No                  | Address format     |
| WalletConnect Safe[^5] | Polygon | No                  | Tx incompatible    |

> | WalletConnect Safe     | RSK     | No                  | Tx incompatible    |

Reviewer: Nitpicking but I find the Reason for those two cases a bit confusing.

If, for the given mechanism, we have Transaction compatibility than I believe we also have Control compatibility.
Not having Transaction compatibility does not implicate not having Control compatibility. In my opinion and at least in theory.

This is not the current state on Ledger I believe but I can think of a situation when Ledger asks to switch to Arbitrum app (no Transaction compatibility because I had to switch apps) while the same mechanism is used for signing on both networks (has Control compatibility).

Author: It doesn't imply it directly, but if we don't know we have transaction compatibility we don't *know* that we have control compatibility. A contract multisig is the perfect example. If you look at the cited Wintermute attack, the issue was sending to a contract multisig on a network that would have supported the same multisig, but the multisig wasn't deployed yet. The attack was to deploy the multisig in such a way that the intended recipients did not control the multisig anymore, and seize the funds that way. Ultimately if we don't know for a fact that the connected signer can sign for multiple networks, we can't assume that it will for control compatibility purposes, or we expose the user to attacks.

compatibility.

#### `SigningService` updates

The `SigningService` should add a new method:

```typescript
isControlCompatible(objectOnNetwork: AddressOnNetwork | NameOnNetwork,
otherNetwork: Network): boolean

// Examples
signingService.isAddressControlCompatible(
  { address: "0x1f9840a85d5af5bf1d1762f925bdaddc4201f984", network: ETHEREUM },
  BITCOIN
) // false

signingService.isAddressControlCompatible(
  { address: "0x1f9840a85d5af5bf1d1762f925bdaddc4201f984", network: ETHEREUM },
  POLYGON
) // => true if we have a signer for it, and if the signer is transaction-compatible
  //    between Ethereum and Polygon
```

This method should return `true` if the given networked object (address or
name) is control-compatible on the specified `otherNetwork`. To check control
compatibility, the signing service should check:

- If the two networks have incompatible address formats, return `false`.
- If there is no known signer for that address, return `false`.
- If there is a known signer (internal, Ledger, or otherwise), the backing service
  for that signer should have a new implemented method, `isTransactionCompatible`,
  defined below; return the result of that method.

> Additionally

Reviewer: Yes sir?

Author: For the love of…

network. Exploring this problem space led to the development of control
compatibility as a concept.

For general name resolution, all names should be saved or resolved as on a
particular network---for example, if a user renames an account while on
Ethereum mainnet in the UI, the name should be persisted as the name for that
account on Ethereum. If the ENS resolver on Ethereum mainnet returns an address
for the name, that address should be considered to be valid on Ethereum
mainnet. All name resolution requests should thus return an `AddressOnNetwork`,
as above, that corresponds to the network the address's name was resolved on.

Once that name percolates into the UI, the UI should use control compatibility
to determine whether to display it in a given context. For example, a keyring
account's name might be present no matter what network the user is viewing. A
Ledger account's name, on the other hand, might only display if it's on a
transaction-compatible network.

Similarly, when entering a recipient address in the Send page, the name should
only be considered resolved if a resolved name is returned that is

> control-compatible to the requested network. This might be adjusted by giving

Reviewer 2: Does it mean that we will be able to use ENS for Sending on networks other than Ethereum or not? Assuming the account user wants to send funds to is not an imported signer but some other address

Author: If it's not an address we control we should either disallow it or make it clear to the user that there is no guarantee they're actually sending to the same person, and the funds could get lost.
